Okay, unless you had any questions before I start.
No.
Okay, good.
We were just talking about the production of your biography, and you said you had an interventionist mode, is that correct?
Well, Yeats believed a great deal in the design of his books, you know, and he involved himself in every stage of them, and he, of course, his sisters began one of the most important arts and crafts printing press in
This is a matter of some interest to me.
I'm working on a new book of my own.
on this whole concept of book culture.
Really?
Yeah.
I have a book in print called A Gentle Madness, which is about the history of bibliomania.
It was published in 1995 by Holt.
And they also did a beautiful job with end sheets.
Well, it is, and not, gentle may not have been always the right word, because I knew I wanted decorated end papers, and I wanted the landscape of childhood to be the first one, and the landscape of maturity to be the last one.
You know, Psycho at the beginning and Kool Park.
And they thought it would be expensive, and they demurred a bit, but actually it wasn't that expensive, and I think it makes it a beautiful book.
It's really not.
I think they told me that End Sheets probably added, I think, 30 or 50 cents to the cost of the book, which is, let's face it, that's not a bet.
It's not going to kill anybody, you know.
But I am interested in what you were saying about Yeats' own, his attitude towards the production of the book, what a book looks like.
Could you expand a bit on that?
No.
The book as an object was something that he understood.
He's an artist's son.
I mean, the chapter title I chose at the beginning, The Artist's Children, is very deliberate.
And he knew that a book isn't just, it's not just what it contains, it's what it seems and feels and is, that gentle madness.
And his instructions to his publishers are always very precise.
And the first book, you know, no green and no shamrocks.
I like that.
Because he was very determined that his books and his art wouldn't resemble the stereotypical derivative provincial notion of Irishness, you know, what he called hearts and pepper pots.
And I think one of the ways in which he is a revolutionary in artistic terms is that he was determined to produce a kind of art that would be distinctively Irish, but also modern.
You know, it wasn't to be
reactionary it wasn't to be looking back to some sort of imagined Gaelic Never Neverland.
He's a very modern minded person and I think the books demonstrate that and the bindings of his early books like The Wind Among the Reeds have a Celtic motif but it's also
It's also very modern.
It's very fin de siècle.
It's very of its time.
Do you think he had an attitude that the reading of the writing of the poetry or the prose or whatever would be influenced in some way by the physical object?
I think so, in a way.
He was, of course, I mean, he was publishing first in the late 80s and the 90s, and he knew he lived very near Elkin Matthews in Bedford Park, who produced those astonishingly.
beautiful books with the poets, like John Gray's Silver Points, you know, with the poems printed right down the very center of a big page, and with off-center page numbers and all the sort of marks of the 1890s style.
He was very conscious that it was a great age of bookmaking, and some of his own books are, I think, ornaments of that.
But he
He wanted the best possible quality productions, and he knew his books would be collector's items.
It's part of the way that he knows he's going to be famous from the age of 15, which I always find both impressive and faintly chilling.
I love this.
This is fascinating.
How do you think he would respond...
By the way, the questions I'm asking you will not necessarily appear in my column, okay?
But this is a work in progress here, and I think this is the kind of thing I am definitely looking for.
How do you think he'd respond to this whole digital revolution?
I mean, the suggestion that there might not even be a book of the future as we know it, I mean, on paper and between boards.
How would he respond to that, do you think?
I don't know, but I hope he would take my line on it, naturally.
Which is?
Which is that there will always be books in tandem with the digital revolution, book sales have taken off.
You know, I mean, beautiful books are still made, and books are sold in increasingly great numbers.
They may not always be the kind of books you and I would want to see selling great numbers, but I think the reading of print on pages
is something that's encouraged and sustained by the reading of print on screens.
I don't think that screens were replaced pages.
What I'm finding is I think that's undoubtedly going to be the case.
You'll find certain things that belong in computers like the OED, you know, the Encyclopedia Britannica, reference things that are constantly being updated
and that are more readily accessible by computers, you know, that's probably where they belong.
Yeah, I think that the text that has to be continually changed is obviously perfectly adapted for the computer age.
But I think there are other texts which don't, which are still more conveniently accessed, if one has to use this often, language in softer hardcovers.
Okay, well now let's talk about your work on this book.
It is interesting to me that now this is an authorized biography, correct?
Yeah, it was authorized by Michael and Ann Yates, the poet's son and daughter.
And after many false starts, which are indicated in my introduction, I guess, but they did in the 1960s, I think, probably, well, Mrs. Yates had died.
They had all these papers.
Richard Ellman had just written his great book on Joyce.
They felt there should be...
a biography of that kind of scale and detail, and about the life as much as the work.
And they asked Dennis Dunning, he was a great critic, to do it, but after two years he gave up.
And then they asked a historian called Leland Lyons.
To whom you dedicate the book.
Yeah, he worked on the materials for ten years, but died before he could write anything.
And then they asked me, another historian, but Michael Yates said a wonderful thing to me,
When I met him to talk about it, he said, I don't want to see a word you've written until it's published.
He said, I want to reserve the right to dislike the book, but not to censor it.
That's a wonderful, wonderful thing.
I mean, would that all inheritors of literary estates took the same line?
Because you well know they don't.
What if he had taken another tack?
What if he said that I grant you access to these materials conditionally?
You know, you wouldn't have done it.
I don't think so.
I think if he had said that, he'd have been a different kind of person, the kind of person one couldn't really, it wouldn't have been the kind of project.
What does a historian bring to this task, say, that a more directly literary kind of a person might not bring to it?
Well, I think it brings, for one thing I'm trained to do,
to assemble a very wide range of materials from different sources.
And I think one of the new things about this book is that I listen to other people talking about Yeats.
You know, I go through correspondences between two people who knew him, as well as going through his own letters.
I sometimes feel that purely, literally, biographers tend to concentrate entirely on the papers that the subject has left behind, often rather carefully arranged and weeded.
and they miss the other angles on the subject that you need to get that's one thing i think also the fact that i've i don't want to say i've adopted a relentlessly chronological approach because that makes it sound pretty boring which i hope it isn't but i think that people like elman's work i revere very much
dealt with Yeats's life in themes, you know, a chapter on the occultism, a chapter on the politics, a chapter on the theatre.
Whereas what struck me was how these things ricocheted off each other and how he would do all these things.
You know, he'd write a poem in the morning or see a journalist at lunch and go to an occult society in the afternoon and then spend the evening writing letters to different people giving different views on it all.
And I wanted to get the sense of how these things impacted upon each other, that when he went on his first trip to America, which I think was hugely important,
in his personal development, that he did it immediately after he'd heard of the shattering news that Mort Gawne had married someone else.
That was both a trauma and a liberation, and I think the fact that in America then he finds his public voice, he starts to become the quarrelsome, confident public man after this shock to his masculinity.
Was it coincidental that it happened in America?
I don't think it was, and I think that other people who would have approached his life thematically would have the more gone thing in one chapter in the American show, although no one, as far as I can see, except me, has written great detail about his American tours.
In another chapter, whereas I see one as a response or a reaction to the other,
Similarly, after the riots over the Playboy of the Western world, he goes, John O'Leary, his old mentor in politics, dies.
Yeats doesn't go to his funeral.
He goes off to Italy with Lady Gregory and discovers his interest in patronage and elitism in art.
All these things affect each other.
And if you're a historian, you approach them in that way.
I think the awful word is imbricated.
I'm sorry, do that once again, that word?
What was the word again?
I think it's imbricated.
Okay.
But I don't want it.
Well, I can certainly check.
I didn't want to labor over the transcription of it.
I'm sorry, go ahead.
Well, you see my point.
I do entirely, precisely.
So you really did... I'm sorry, go ahead.
I think what I tried to do is weave a sort of tapestry of all these actions rather than sort them out as Yates did in his autobiographies into neatly separated.
Of course, quite significantly, you do conclude this first volume of what you project to be a two-volume biography.
I mean, it's not just a chronological point.
It's not just the age of 50, but here Yeats is writing about his own life.
That's exactly right.
Another thing that I think is new is that at the beginning of the book, I deal with his childhood, but not from his memories of it, which I think, as everyone's, are highly disingenuous.
I deal with it from, as a historian would, from local records, from newspapers, from family letters, from memories.
And then at the end, I return to the childhood, but as he is interpreting it, pushing 50, slightly disillusioned, realizing he doesn't have a wife or a child, realizing he is 50, becoming interested in the Ireland that's passing because he has, you know, he thinks home rule is coming.
And I always wanted to end with the sense of a future that he didn't know was going to happen.
I'd gone on to 1916 when the revolution begins and he had to suddenly reinsert himself into radical Irish politics.
It would have been a more jagged, fragmented ending.
And I always wanted the closure that he brings to the end of his volume of reveries over childhood and youth.
I always thought that was much wonderful.
Do you agree a number of biographers and historians whom I have interviewed, thinking of David Baccala or
the fellow who did the wonderful book on Theodore Roosevelt.
Both of these fellows, a gentleman, have told me that you learn as much about, when you read a person's memoirs or their autobiography, you learn as much about what they have to say about themselves, not only by what they say, but by what they don't say, by what they leave out.
Would you agree that that applies to Yeats?
Yes, I think the absences in Yeats is...
memories are very significant.
And I think also the presentation of his family in a historical framework, he sees his mother's family as these pre-modern merchants and sailors.
In fact, they're hard-headed property developers.
He has a way of
choosing an angle on things, which is, it's very important that he leave, that what he doesn't say is that they are hard-headed property developers, because what in fact he's doing is trying to forge a sort of non-material, non-materialist view of Ireland.
On the other hand, when he writes the later volumes of his memoirs, and when he writes his unpublished memoirs, which are left behind him when he dies,
he is ostentatiously frank about his sex life, or seems to be, but he's, because he talks about masturbation and so forth, but he does so in a way
as a strategy of concealment, too.
He tells you so much that he puts you off the scent.
There's more to be said.
Well, do you think, you know, clearly he must have had an idea that Roy Foster would come along at some point?
He didn't know who you were.
I'm sorry?
Yeah, the great thing is the epigraph to my book, you know, where he says a poet's life is an experiment in living and those that come afterwards have a right to know it.
So you think that even though he did, by some of the absences that you mentioned or through his very deft handling of things, he really did not try to distort his own history in any way or to try and hide things that some people might find embarrassing or are better left unsaid?
I think he arranges things into patterns, which is a way of conceivament, but it's also what artists do.
And what I wanted to do was break up those patterns, you know, to get back to some disaggregated way of living, which is how we live our lives.
We don't live our lives.
As I say, I'm an introduction to teens, but people often write about us as if we do.
But he always knew he was going to be written about, and of course he was being written about.
You know, before my book ends, when he's still in his 40s, people are writing books about it.
But Michael Yates' son, at the launch of my book in Dublin, spoke very matter-of-factly but rather movingly about his parents.
And he said he remembered them having a conversation about their letters, because obviously both sides of that correspondence were there in their house, and his mother's inclination was to destroy them.
And his father said, no, leave them be.
They are history.
That's marvelous, isn't it?
He knew he was history.
From anyone else that would be, you know, just obnoxiously arrogant.
But somehow it's reasonable because he is history.
He's a witness to history and a commentator on it, but he's making it as well.
Because I think without the cultural autonomy which Yeats's literary enterprise was determined to forge, without that political independence would have been a fairly
Tell me about your own attitude.
I think it's also healthy, the fact that you are detached.
You really don't come to this with any baggage, so to speak, that I can perceive.
You do kind of come with a fresh eye, a fresh attitude.
You are outside the loop, so to speak.
And maybe if you could tell me what your own attitude regarding Yates was, what you knew of him, and how the absence of, I'm assuming, of preconceptions made this a very balanced kind of an endeavor.
I'm glad you say so, because that's what I'd have wanted.
On the other hand, it's, I suppose, only fair to say that one reason why I stress Yeats's position as someone from the marginalised Protestant middle class, that declining minority in Ireland, you know, who don't have broad acres and hungers and Georgia houses, who are from a clerical, professional business background, but who are Protestants and therefore are told by zealous nationalists that they can never be properly Irish if they aren't Catholic and Gaelic.
Yeats, as you know from my book, is
embroiled in this it's it may not be irrelevant that i'm from that background myself uh of the protest middle classes now declined to something like 1.9 southern population and i did i suppose empathize to a certain degree with yeats's determination to to claim irishness
to assert that the fact that he isn't Catholic of Gaelic stock doesn't make him any less Irish for that, because I believe that passionately myself.
As to how I came to Yeats, my mother taught English.
My parents were both schoolteachers.
My mother went to school in Sligo and was obsessed by Yeats and used to read his poems a lot.
She and my father remembered when they were students in the late 1930s in Dublin.
remember them you know walking the streets of being a great figure and i think irish people grow up with a sense of him because he is a great national figure you know it's not like it's not like a poet like elliot or or or hardy or wallace stevens who has a very private existence it's the poet who is a part of his country's history
and has to take him center stage.
And so if you're Irish, Yeats is part of your inheritance, and that's why people feel they own him in a way, and that's why writing about him, you run the risk of treading on all sorts of corners.
Also, when I was studying history as an undergraduate, I was struck by
Reading works on modern Irish history that I admired, like Conor Cruz O'Brien's path-breaking book on Parno, which he wrote, gosh, 40 years ago, which I would have read now 30 or 25 years ago, I noticed to my interest that he used Yeats's poetry and Yeats's political statements in that almost as historical evidence, you know, that Yeats was woven into this political study of Irish nationalism.
And I think that, which was a book that had to
great effect on me when I read it when I was 19 or 20.
That made me always think of Yeats being part of Irish political history as well as part of Irish cultural history.
And of course, he's been dead now for how many years?
Well, I guess nearly 40.
He died in 1939.
Okay, and his work just seems to resonate even more today, doesn't it?
I mean, it has a pertinence to it.
Probably even more than he might have thought.
Would you agree with that?
Yes.
In fact, I'd say nearly 40 years, nearly 60 years.
I thought 60 sounded more like that.
I would die if it's too late.
That's nice.
Yeah, I think it's also very interesting actually to be writing about Yeats in the 1990s when Ireland is having a great what one might call a cultural boom.
You know, I think Irish writing, Irish music, Irish art is now both dynamic and internationally influential in a way that it was through Yeats' efforts in the 1890s, 100 years ago.
I don't want to claim too much for a second Irish Renaissance, but certainly Irish cultural self-confidence is very, very high at the moment, and Irish artists in music and painting as well as in writing are very, very influential, very, very high profile.
So it's quite interesting to be writing about Yeats at a time when the cultural autonomy, which he believed in,
And of course you're alert to this debate that rages, I don't know how
how wildly it rages on the other side of the Atlantic, but, you know, this whole argument over the canon and the dead white European males dominating the literary canon and whether or not these people belong in their terms, which is a ridiculous discussion.
But it does seem to me that, you know, you have a book about Yeats, you have a book about Shea Selfie out there right now.
This interest in...
these great writers doesn't seem to be lagging at all, does it?
I think you'd have to be an absolute looper to exclude Yates from the canon or to claim that he was only there because he was white and male.
It just doesn't work.
I love the word looper.
How would you spell that?
L-O-O-P-E-R, maybe?
Good.
Okay, I just want to make sure I use it properly.
Go ahead.
You know, I mean, the work is so self-evidently extraordinary and influential and enterprising.
And from the poems of the 1890s right through to the end of his life, he's continually making it new.
He's continually setting the agenda.
He's always read by the young.
I think, as I say, you'd have to be a deeply deluded fanatic to try and claim that he should be, his work should be studied less than when I wish not continued.
Well, I quite agree with you, but there are people who would nevertheless say that... I think that someone in Stanford would say that... Yeah, I think so.
I mean, you know... ...underestimated...
But we're not going to say anymore.
Well, whatever.
But you can actually get a degree in English literature from a number of prominent institutions here without being required to read Shakespeare.
And explain that to me, how that's possible.
But I've actually documented an instance of a young man graduating summa cum laude from Amherst College, which is not a bad institution, in English.
Not literature, English, right?
And he never took a course in Shakespeare, Milton, Chaucer, Spencer, you know?
Well, I believe you, but I'm not going to pass judgment on this because it's redundant.
Well, how can you purport to be an authority on English literature?
Well, you haven't demonstrated.
Undoubtedly, this individual must have read.
That's one of the arguments I get.
Well, if you're going to be summa cum laude and you go to Amherst, we assume that you know Shakespeare.
You know, assumptions are one thing, but you have to demonstrate a facility.
It would seem to me.
He's read love to Tony Morrison.
Don't quote me.
No, I'm not.
But, yeah, you can see where I'm, you know, this is a matter of some great consideration, concern for me in this book, which is a meditation on the canon debates as we approach this new millennium, you know, books and libraries and all these attitudes.
So, I mean, the things you're telling me right now, I have to tell you, are very, very interesting to me.
So tell me how, you know, do you have a timetable for book two?
Well, I'm hoping that it'll be done in three to four years, because I've worked on this first volume for over ten years, and all the time I was collecting material that would be relevant to the second half of life, too.
But I'm a professor in Oxford of Irish history.
I teach history courses.
I'm becoming more and more drawn into administration the way one is, and I desperately need the time to write.
But I hope if I can organize that over the next mile that the book two will be...
Volume two will be out.
That's a nice year, isn't it?
I was just up to Oxford three weeks ago to introduce Dr. John Simmons over at All Souls College for this new book I'm working on.
I think I certainly have the book here which speaks for itself.
No reason to question you on it.
I think that you have been very kind and gracious with your time here.
Anything that we should have covered that we didn't that you can think of?
No, I think it's been very...
Good.
Okay, well, we'll go ahead and write a nice piece on this.
I wish you a safe journey home.
I look forward to your piece.
Will you send it to Oxford University?
Of course, yeah, and I will because they don't have a clipping surface, and I'll let them know what publications it runs, and I do a syndicated column in University Town, so it's, you know, Oxford books are really just wonderful for me.
I'm in Eugene, Oregon, in Salt Lake City, in Charlottesville, Virginia, Knoxville, Tennessee, Jackson, Mississippi, Columbus, Madison, Austin.
These are all big university towns.
That's great, and I much look forward to your work.
Well, thank you.
Thank you.
It'll be fun.
How do I get in touch with you?
Write if I have any further questions.
I'm from Hartford College, Oxford.
But in the next week, I'm sort of all over the place.
Well, I'm not thinking in the next week.
If I want to write you with any subsequent questions for this work in progress.
Hartford, H-E-R-T-F-O-R-D.
As in Connecticut, right?
Oxford OX13VW.
OX13V as in Victor?
WB as in Benjamin.
B as in Benjamin.
Okay, good.
Thank you, sir.
Okay, thank you.
Take care.
Bye-bye.